# Release Notes
## Universal Biological Knowledge Graph (UBKG)
### Generation Framework
### Version 3.0
August 2, 2023

# 1. Standardized CodeID format
## Issue
The CodeID property of Code nodes in the UBKG recreated the format of the UMLS, which was inconsistent.

Almost all codes from the UMLS kept the SAB and the code separate, allowing the UBKG to 
generate CodeID properties in the format _SAB_ _delimiter_ _code_--e.g., **UBERON 0004684**.

Although only a small number of vocabularies from the UMLS diverge from this format, most of these vocabularies are important. 
The following table lists the vocabularies and their default formats.

| SAB  | format         |
|------|----------------|
| HGNC | HGNC HGNC:code |
| GO   | GO GO:code     |
| HPO  | HPO HP:code    |

(A fourth vocabulary, HCPCS, also included the SAB for some codes and used colons in codes.)

The generation script replicated the code formats from HGNC, GO, and HPO. In addition, the 
original delimiter between SAB and code was a space.

## Change
The format for the CodeID property for all codes is now **SAB:code**.

# 2. Format for CUIs for non-UMLS Code nodes 
## Issue
The CUI property of codes from sources other than the UMLS had been in the format of a base64-encoded version of the Code ID.
For example, if the CodeID for a Code node was **UBERON 0004684**, the CUI was **VUJFUk9OIDAwMDQ2ODQ=**.

## Change
The CUI property for codes from sources other than the UMLS is now in the format **SAB:CODE CUI**.
(The " CUI" appendix distinguishes the CUI from the CodeID to allow neo4j to import the CODE relationship between a Code node and its Concept. The neo4j-admin tool requires unique IDs in links.)

# 3. Reduction in number of duplicative preferred terms
## Issue
In general, a set of assertions refers to nodes that are defined in another ontology. For example, the PATO ontology asserts relationships between UBERON codes.

The node file for a set of assertions includes a **node_label** that is used to generate the "preferred term" for a node: a Term node linked to the Code node with a relationship of type PT.

In general, a node file can specify a preferred term for a code from another ontology that differs from the preferred term assigned to the code by its owner.
For example, although UBERON may give code UBERON 0004684 a preferred term of "Lung", PATO may define the preferred term for UBERON 0004684  
as "Knee". 

We defined the business rule that only the ontology that owns a code can define the code's preferred term. If an ontology defines a preferred term for a code from another ontology, the generation script creates a term, but of relationship type 
**PT_SAB**. In the above example, the UBERON 0004684 code would have both a PT term of "Lung" and a PT_PATO term of "Knee".

If the preferred term is the same in both the owning and referring ontologies, the generation script would generate
a single Term with both the PT and PT_SAB relationships. This is unnecessarily duplicative.

## Change
The business rule was modified: a PT_SAB term will only be defined if one of the following are true:
1. There is no PT term from the owning ontology in the ontology CSVs.
2. The PT_SAB term is different than the PT term.

## Limitation
Although the change to the business rule eliminates most cases of duplicative PT_SAB terms, it cannot remove those from interdependent ontologies. 
For example, the CL ontology refers to UBERON codes and the UBERON ontology refers to CL codes. The order of ingestion determines whether a CL code would get a PT_UBERON (the current case) or an UBERON code would get a PT_CL case.

The only way to eliminate all duplicative PT_SAB terms would be to process the CODE-SUIs.csv file after all SABs were ingested.

# 4.Trimming of Ensembl IDs from GenCode

## Issue
GenCode associates genes and transcripts with Ensembl IDs that include the version number--e.g., **ENSG00000186092.7**.

Other sources, however (e.g., ERCCREG) use Ensembl IDs that do not include the version number. This makes joining GenCode against these sources difficult.

## Change
The generation script stores as Code ID the Ensembl ID without the version number. The script includes the version number as the **value** property of a Code node from the ENSEMBL SAB.